---
layout: default
title: Reflecting on a Mathematical Problem
categories: [education, knowledge, mathematics, pedagogy]
tags: [maths, teaching, science, creativity]
---
# Reflecting on a Mathematical Problem

I never loved mathematics, and consequently, never did more than was minimally required of me to get decent-but-not-amazing grades in it. I don't particularly blame anyone for this – nor myself, quite happily. I wasn't interested, so I did about as well as someone disinterested in the subject. We can't all be Isaac Newton.

But in stumbling through my mid-20's I've recently fallen in love with mathematics – or at least, I've seen and felt enough of its beauty to *get* what loving mathematics is all about – in other words, how it even happens. I credit this to three people, in particular: Grant Sanderson (better known as 3blue1brown) for his YouTube animations, Steven Strogatz for his book 'Infinite Powers' and Paul Lockhart (the lamenting mathematician) for his book 'Measurement', which I'm still combing my way through. It's worth saying – having digested these in addition to many other sources of content of varying quality and personal value, I'm still not very good at maths. What I have gained from these works above all is simply a *desire to know more*.

It's a cliché (and in my view, an accurate one) to say that school gives us answers to problems we don't have. You walk into class on the first day of term and there on the board you see some big ugly alphanumerical formula. Only after being made to look at it in all of its ugliness are you then mercifully told that this can be used to derive the third side of a right-angled triangle, so long as you know the other two lengths. Gee, well now we're talking! Obviously, you don't care about this – not unless you're some sort of freakish collector of right-angled triangle trivia. Alas, the educators have accounted for such an unfortunate possibility. They have come up with some 'real world' examples to convince your adolescent mind of why the offensive looking symbols are in fact important. In reality, you just grow to hate these 'real word' examples, finding them about as dull as any other piece of unwanted information one might press upon you about botany or linguistics.

And this is a perfectly normal response: not everything that's useful is worth caring about – just as not everything that's worth caring about is useful. A toilet serves an indispensable purpose in one's everyday life; this is not a fact which has ever prompted me to take a measuring tape to its basin or derive its distance from the shower.

So you satisfy yourself with the fact that you're better at languages anyhow. Or you're a people-person, not like those weird kids more interested in shapes than humans. And if you put some elbow-grease into memorising enough trigonometric rules and remember to bring the right formula book to the exam, you can coast along with some decent-but-not-amazing grades.

The more perverse consequence of all of this is the slow and painful invention of something called 'Maths anxiety'. The anxiety is a very real and tragic thing. What I mean by 'invention' is simply that it is not produced by the subject or by the child, but by the educational system – and that its production is a completely understandable response. Calling it 'maths anxiety' has the same ring to it as would tying someone to the tracks, giving them a very blunt knife, then puzzling as to the causes of your phobia of high speed rail. This is exactly why attempting to increase a kid's maths confidence is often more damaging, or if you're fortunate enough – merely an expensive waste of time. Breathing exercises aren't going to get him off the tracks.

But importantly, all of this this is no one's fault in particular. Parents know that maths is something society views very favourably, and they very reasonably want to help their kids. Teachers and educational committees know that most kids find the curriculum and the textbooks boring, so they try to make the examples better, or the applications more clear-cut, all within the confinements of an increasingly stringent, standardised system. But none of it tends to help very much because the problem isn't confidence or belief and it isn't applicability and it isn't the examples or the homework – it's simply that caring about any of it in the very first place is nearly impossible, under the circumstances. This applies to almost all schoolwork, but is especially true for maths.

The natural response is of course to make the format more engaging, by hook or by crook. This typically belies another misconception: that the only way to make maths sufficiently interesting is by forcing 'engaging material' down their throats. The message this implicitly communicates is either a) that the subject matter in itself isn't interesting enough to stand on its own two feet, or b) even supposing it were, that the kids themselves aren't capable of seeing as much. In other words, you now find yourself nursing the problem of 'organised fun' – a contradiction in terms which cannot be resolved by any amount of interactive quizzes, discussions with your next-door neighbour or trigonometric trivia.

The central issue is not so much a particular teaching policy or the pedagogical devices as it is a kind of statutory dishonesty – a pack of lies covertly told to students. Call it the magical recipe doctrine. The magical recipe doctrine is a performative act engaged in by any teacher who fails to acknowledge the following all too natural question: namely, 'how in the name of God are they getting *that* and Christ who even *thinks* of doing something like THAT?! In other words, this is when the teacher performs the equivalent of a miracle on the white-board, and then asks 'Did everyone follow that? Do I need to explain anything, or can we move on?' rather than something like 'ISN'T THIS JUST INSANE?! Isn't it fucking insane! And so... so beautiful?' as any normal person should when shown, for instance,... The lie students are implicitly being told is that this follows naturally from that. Which is true, and yet so radically false. Because in maths, 'this following from that' conceals the sheer scale of the mental territory being traversed; the creative leaps in discovering any of these things. 
