---
layout: default
title: 5 Steps to the Destruction of Philosophy
categories: [philosophy, knowledge]
tags: [empiricism, holism, science]
---
# 5 Steps to the Destruction of Philosophy
<br>
<br>

Empiricism took five positive turns after Hume, according to Quine.

The first turn, accomplished by the British empiricists, was  from ideas to words. Concerned, as Quine says, to 'make sense out of the senses' and thereby ground knowledge on sound foundations, the empiricists diagnosed 'ideas' as problematic. Ideas were problematic because of their abstract character. Quite simply, what was abstract was not translatable into any kind of sense data, and what could not be translated into the language of sensory experience was, strictly speaking, non-sense. So such things as ideas, thoughts, concepts and the like were to be dismissed as meaningless. Words on the other hand – being physically observable, directly sensible objects – met the criteria. Words were the first vehicle of meaning the empiricists came upon.

But if words were vehicles of meaning, then they weren't exactly roadworthy. Examples of words with a peculiarly 'unsensory' character abound. Conjunctives, prepositions and indexical terms – the ‘and’s ‘or’s, ‘on’s and ‘here's of this world, for instance – are in no obvious way derivable from sense data, yet these are clearly meaningful, necessary items, which any satisfactory theory of meaning should be able to accommodate. How can a theory of meaning be grounded if it rejects the meaning of terms this basic? So much the worse for words, the empiricist's replied. Empiricism had to be inflated, if knowledge was to be grounded. And so it was that the second innovation was realised: the shift from words to sentences. The attribution of meaning to free-floating, individual words was rejected as deficient. Words had to be furnished with something more. That something more was called *context*; or more precisely, the context of the sentence. A troublesome word, the empiricists reasoned, posed a far lesser threat within the confines of a sentence. And so long as there existed another meaningful sentence into which offending terms could be paraphrased, then any word could be harmlessly recast in terms of different sentences, whose meaning could ultimately be cashed out at the level of experience. Sense had been recovered.

But this too was a temporary restructuring: the sentinels of sense could not hold onto their sentences for very long. And, as with most goods, seizure meant further inflation. This time, inflation would come in the shape of a more centralised contextual authority: *the system*. The system comprised the framework, the grammar, the theory within which sentences hung together. An outgrowth of its antecedent, this third shift embodied the belief among philosophers that sentences could not be extracted, understood or inspected in any vacuum. A sentence, to put it differently, is an exquisitely nested entity, an edge whose beginning and ending form corners, intersecting with other sentences, in a web of similarly threaded edges and corners. What remained when one corner had been extracted from its surrounding sides was surely not the absurdity of an isolated corner! Empirical claims, according to this new doctrine, the third empirical turn, were to be considered as dependent upon yet further agglomerations of sentences dependent on auxiliary sentences, axiomatic sentences, background sentences, and so on and so forth in the fractal web of sentence space, so to speak.

Recognition of this fact spawned a somewhat surprising result; that sentences – individual statements – could neither be verified or falsified in themselves. Rather, if a given scientific statement failed for this or that reason, only the entire edifice, taken as a whole, as a ‘corporate body’ could be found wanting – precisely because the sentence itself was no longer the locus of meaning.

There lay a clear deathblow to the first dogma of empiricism, as Quine called it: reductionism. The second – the existence of an analytic/synthetic divide – would soon dissolve with it.

If statements are not objects of meaning, then the supposed existence of analytic statements – those deemed to be true by virtue of the meaning of their constituent terms – within the corporate body could no more be accepted than could the existence of intrinsically blue or green sentences – much less bleen or grue sentences. Analytic statements could be straightforwardly rejected:

>“The organizing role that was supposedly the role of analytic sentences is now seen as shared by sentences generally, and the empirical content that was supposed peculiar to synthetic sentences is now seen as diffused through the system”

In other words, since theories only bear meaning as a whole, and not as isolable ideas, words or sentences, we can drop this entire synthetic/analytic charade altogether. There’s simply no sense to whether or not a given statement is analytic or synthetic. Just as there's no sense to whether a given atom is moving or being moved. Sentences are not vehicles of meaning, nor do they 'derive' meaning from the rest of the system. Only the system itself, as a whole, as an organismic blur carries meaning. To ask whether that blur is an analytic blur or a synthetic blur is no better than looking to the heavens and asking whether the cloud up above is a wet one: neither a ‘yes’ or a ‘no’ can appreciably eliminate the misconception. The only appropriate response is to explain why the question is useless.

Having eliminated analytic statements in the fourth stage, the fifth empiricist achievement follows closely in toe. No ‘first philosophy’ can ever exist. Enough with the Popish worship of metaphysics – absent the analytic/synthetic division of labour, the chasm alleged to separate science from non-science helplessly closes in on itself. There is no room left for Cartesian reasoning from first principles. We can, indeed we must, be uncowering naturalists. We must not only get on with the business of probing the scientific landscape; but further, we must expropriate the philosopher's once sovereign territory. The blob of naturalism is global, and total in its scope: it must swallow its forebears so that we together can be liberated.

This is our final result: holism is empiricism's final destination, and with it ring out the death knells of philosophy – or at least, philosophy as we have known it.

Philosophy, insofar as we can still respectably refer to anything of the sort, is left with little choice but to relax its authoritative grip upon the abstract, normative, or analytic species of our world. The philosopher must forfeit his status as nature’s embroider. His craftsmanship has earned him a new station. His 'natural' purpose: to ward us off his farm – lest we repeat the mistakes of posterity and fall into the metaphysical slurry pit. As Daniel Dennett’s ‘bumper sticker slogan’ has it, philosophy, so construed, is ‘what you’re doing until you figure out just what questions to ask’. It is only once your thoughts have been pruned of irrelevant and confused nonsense, held under the light of historical foolishness, disabused of all sophomoric pretensions and elevated above the reductios and reductions, that they may be submitted. 'But submitted where?' you ask. Submitted, why of course, to the scientists.

The upshot is that philosophy is, to put a finer and final point on it, *for* science. In the same way that one might employ a research assistant to manually comb through unsympathetically collated spreadsheets for the purposes of 'real' data analysis, or perhaps to prepare some apparatus for the 'real' experiment, so too the philosopher's efforts are to be usefully repurposed towards a kind of pedantic fussing over the circularities and non-sequiturs which are bound to crop up before the 'real' thinking begins. Philosophy is to science as proofreading is to writing: useful, but incapable of generating much in the way of insight. Because, again, there are no philosophical problems – only failures to clarify one's thoughts. Serious thinking means no longer doing philosophy, means generating scientific hypotheses.

And who could be so blind as to challenge such a claim, given the current data – existing as it does (or perhaps more accurately, as it no longer does) both in and outside of the philosophy departments? Philosophy is dead. Philosophy remains dead. And the philosophers have killed it.

This deed is still more distant from them than the most distant stars – and yet they have done it themselves.
