---
layout: default
title: Why Scientific Objectivism and Moral Relativism are Incompatible
categories: [philosophy, knowledge]
tags: [ethics, morality, objectivism]
---

# Why Scientific Objectivism and Moral Relativism are Incompatible

The is-ought distinction receives undue attention in discussions of whether morality is 'objective'.

You can't derive an ought from an is – true enough. Nor, for that matter, can you get an orange out of a banana, or a fish from a raindrop. Yet reasonable people are seduced by the idea that acknowledging this truism – that is and ought claims are different things – somehow spells the undoing of moral realism, the end of moral truths.

The problem emerges from a brittle epistemology laced with merciless irrelevancies. Often (though not always) the plunge from a logical gap between is and ought to the murky depths of anti-realism precedes or receives a host of other claims – for instance, about how we are ecologically 'fitted' apes endowed with parochial brains subject to the whims of biology. We just contingently happen to feel pain in response to certain stimuli, and have found ways of socially sanctioning behaviours which produce less of it. So just as gorillas tend to walk around quadripedally and learn relatively nifty motor sequences of leaf-grabbing and chewing, we linguistically endowed cousins happen to walk about on two feet, learning complex sequences of 'sharing is caring' which may, albeit under historically rare circumstances, be harnessed into democracies, economic freedoms, liberal tolerance and reciprocal norms of tolerance. None of it must, however, be true – it need only be useful for self-motivated agents pursuing survival. For, of course – the gaps! Don't you know that you can't 'is' your way to an 'ought'. How on Earth could we hope to build universal moral foundations upon such cheap, flimsy scaffolding.

The urge to place human morality atop secure formal axioms, game-theoretical algorithms, religious claims and procedures – the wish to ‘nothing-but’ morality as a mere collection of social conventions and trade-offs – is a direct extension of this reasoning. Some people like burgers, some people like curry. Who’s to say which is ‘better’. More pointedly, what could such a thing even 'mean', in absolute terms?

The argument has its analogue in historical debates regarding AI and creativity. To take one instructive case in point, Herbert Simon balked at just how 'unusual' he thought it that Popper could, in *The Logic of Scientific Discovery* '...disclaim the existence of the subject matter that the title of his treatise announces'. In other words, here was Popper purporting to speak about the logic of science, all the while appearing to reject its very tenability at every turn. Simon considered this mysticism. He led a cohort of researchers attempting to formalise scientific inquiry, and thus in principle, to automate the reasoning steps of a scientist. Since there was nothing magic about rationality, it should in principle have been possible to build a reasoning machine capable of replicating the thinking of a scientist, or indeed an artist. In short, he thought creativity was a matter of pattern-matching.

Simon's efforts bore little fruit. He failed to understand that there could be more (albeit not supernaturally) to science than reasoning or rationality, and more therefore than mere matching. He mistook the powers of logic for the sum total of science. But as David Miller argues, 'Reasoning is a processing procedure, not a productive one, and it requires material, something on which to reason'. Thus, as Popper liked to quip: 'making comes before matching'. Simon's work was repeatedly dogged by 'frame' problems of this sort, which no amount of pattern matching could overcome.

Behind Simon's bemusement lies a central distinction: denying the supremacy or sufficiency of logic as the driving force behind science is not in itself tantamount to any concession that scientific knowledge must be somehow illogical or irrational or mystical. All that need be acknowledged is the simple claim that knowledge creation – that is, the *constructive* act of a theory's conception – is, unlike the *critical*, tentatively destructive stage of testing it, quite simply an altogether a-logical venture. In other words, that 'making' comes before 'matching', and making isn't reducible to formal, procedural steps.

This is how Popper saw it. Logic was, for Popper, a secondary step which entered the picture solely for the purposes of criticism. Only when supplied with its antecedent – blind conjecture – could it yield solutions – or 'matches'.

Granted, this all seems rather abstrusely removed from anything like the original topic of moral realism. What relevance does a detour into knowledge-creation have in an argument about morality and its relationship with logic? The simple fact remains that a claim about how things are does not comport or commute with claims about how they ought to be. Are we to accept that there are 'true' ways of living, in the same way that there are true theories of physics?

The point is that the inference from 'gappism' to relativisim, instrumentalism, or any other variety of subjectivism on offer, is identical. The argument is that the is-ought 'gap' is, for all intents and purposes, no different from the logical gaps we are quite accustomed to ignoring in all of our scientific investigations, and that only a believer in the supremacy of logic could be troubled by this. Further, just as all observations are 'theory-laden', so too all our empirical investigations are 'ought-laden'. There is no such thing as an 'ought free' science. This has unfortunate consequences for those who seek scientific realism in the presence of moral anti-realism.

Those within this camp ought to be distressed, first, by the existence of what I'm henceforth going to call the (albeit less catchy) "don't-can't" gap.

This unholy thing – the don't-can't gap – is a logical barricade. It happens whenever someone misidentifies a seemingly contingent limitation (any observable trend or pattern in the world) for a necessarily prohibitive law of nature. The move is pervasive within psychology, for instance, when a researcher observing the mean score on a battery of validated measures infers that, humans cannot, due to whatever confluence of environmental and inborn factors, tie their own shoelaces, perform logical puzzles, or hold more than 5 ± 2 items in working memory. The move from the mere tendency (that people don't tie their shoes very well) to the fundamental limitation (i.e., that they can't do this) is, logically, completely invalid.

A good psychologist may go very far in this vein. She may offer what appear to be explanations for the observed impairment, pointing out that people possess a severe bias against tying shoelaces; or better again, that there exists an evolutionarily conserved module in the brain which has left us ill-equipped to handle the modern technological demands of double-knotting at the rate necessitated by today's increasingly laced society. Self-help shelves will, all things going well, meet the new societal problem by stocking books about how to raise teenagers in a world ill-fitted to their sapien brains. They may offer rules and principles regarding what to do when your teen asks for their first pair of sneakers. Others will satisfy themselves with relaying the interesting fact that gut health promotes rudimentary knot-tying abilities, but only in certain subcultures – more research still needed. The more balanced among the commentariat may offer reassurance: although inferior, velcro can nonetheless act as a highly adaptive socio-emotional adhesive when worn during public rituals, out in nature, or during periods of trauma.

Whatever the case may be, the don't-can't gap is logically airtight; it is *never* logically permissible to attempt to derive a 'cannot' from a 'does not'. But of course it's easy to laugh at and dismiss the irrationality of psychologists. More interesting to consider is the fact that don't-can't-ism is even more pervasive in physics. The claim that light cannot travel faster than a certain speed is a logically invalid inference; the more accurate statement is that light has simply tended not to travel above certain speeds. Ditto for the boiling point of water, or the second law of thermodynamics, the attractive and repulsive properties of magnets, and the relationship between force, mass and acceleration.

Now we see it more clearly: the don't-can't gap isn't a shortcoming of science in the slightest. On the contrary; traversing the gap is what makes science what it is!

The question is simply why we should care about this logical gap. What makes the gap purporting to tell us that morality isn't objective different from the (hypothetical) gap purporting to tell us that relativity isn't?

One can of course remain perfectly consistent here by biting the bullet and disclaiming relativity as well. 

Fortunately it isn't how things are. In science, we make conjectures, then we criticise them. The good ones stick around – until they don't. At this point we rejoice in their magical failure, and then continue - raising and sacrificing one theory after another. It really isn't too far off to frame it as magic, followed by logic, on a never-ending loop. If clean derivations were the aim, we would, quite literally, have made zero progress. The simple fact that faster than light travel has tended not to happen, or for the more pedantic among us – has never happened – is, for instance, not a logical case for its impossibility. Yet we know that travelling faster than the speed of light is impossible, and neither you nor I would ever wish to say that this knowledge militates against the objectivity of science. Not even a little bit. Instead of wasting thoughts on these endeavours, we can and must throw out 'derivability' as a desirable criterion. And not because, as thinkers like Sam Harris have argued, science is the primary, or the only game in town, but because conjecture and criticism is.

All of which is simply to say – if the is-ought gap somehow bars the possibility of an objective moral theory, then so too the possibility of an objective scientific theory is barred by the don't-can't gap. Along with the is-must gap, for good measure. This should hardly be surprising, given that these so-called 'violations' are merely cases mirroring what is considered by some as the problem of induction. I say 'considered by some' because there is, strictly speaking, no problem of induction – only the faint appearance of one.
But one might quibble that there appears to be something fishy going on. Aha! The two logical violations aren't equivalent, one might contest. The is-ought gap is a violation which pertains to distinct classes of statements – those about how things descriptively are, and those about some other altogether undefinable class of non-descriptive, otherworldly clauses. The don't-can't gap, on the other hand, is a logical violation involving statements of the same species: namely, about the world which exists before our eyes.

Unfortunately, this will also get you nowhere fast – because it's quite simply false. It's false that a claim about how the world 'can't' (or conversely, 'must') be is somehow more directly 'about' the physcial world than is a claim about how it 'ought' to be. Musts, oughts, shoulds, can'ts; these are all varieties of the unobservable. You don't observe a scientific law anymore than you observe beauty, logic, or morality. Again, if this abhors you, you are welcome to dislodge baby with bathwater. But you will be rejecting the objectivity of the speed of light, the conservation of energy, entropy, and so on. If you wish to argue for one kind of objectivity, but not the other, it rests upon you to demonstrate how the two logical violations are different in a way that should matter.
