---
layout: post
title: Why Scientific Objectivism and Moral Relativism are Incompatible
date: 2024-02-24
categories: [philosophy, knowledge]
tags: [ethics, morality, objectivism]
---

# Why Scientific Objectivism and Moral Relativism are Incompatible

The is-ought distinction receives unwarranted attention in discussions of whether morality is 'objective'.

You can't derive an ought from an is. True enough. Nor, for that matter, can you get an orange out of a banana, or a fish from a frog. Yet reasonable people are seduced by the idea that acknowledging this truism – that is's and oughts are different things – somehow spells the undoing of moral realism: the notion that moral truths exist.

The confusion emerges as a comorbidity of brittle epistemology; that is, of endorsing a theory of knowledge which fails to recognise the fundamental importance of creativity. The wish to reduce human creativity to parochial cognitive machinery is a reliable predictor of philosophical anti-realism, more generally, because if the mind is a 'bag of tricks', then this not only entails that minds are physically explainable, understandable scientific objects – woohoo – but likewise entails that minds follow input-output functions. In other words, meaning that 1) knowledge never reaches beyond the limits dictated by the bag-maker: evolution, or never beyond what already exists inside the bag (in the genome), or 3) the bag’s environment. On these terms, we must be satisfied with our status as ecologically 'fitted' apes with no wider claim to universal moral truths than can be granted to any of the peculiar feedback loops shunting away within any other organismic bag of tricks, surrounded by any other environmental affordances. So just as gorillas tend to walk quadripedally and learn complex motor sequences of leaf-grabbing and chewing, we linguistically endowed apes happen to walk about on two feet, learning complex sequences of 'sharing is caring' which may, under rare circumstances, be harnessed into democracies, economic freedoms and reciprocal norms of tolerance. None of it must, however, be true – it need only be useful.

The urge to place human morality atop secure formal axioms, game-theoretical algorithms and procedures – or as ‘nothing but’ a mere collection of social conventions and incomparable preferences – is a direct extension of this epistemology. Some people like burgers, some people like curry. Who’s to say which is ‘better’.

Some implicit variant of this argument has gripped many the esteemed thinker. Herbert Simon, for instance, balked at just how 'unusual' it was, as he put it, for Popper 'less than one-tenth of the way through his work [The Logic of Scientific Discovery], to disclaim the existence of the subject matter that the title of his treatise announces.' Simon was part of a cohort of researchers attempting to formalise scientific inquiry, and thus in principle, automate the reasoning steps of a scientist. He thought creativity was a matter of pattern-matching. But as David Miller has pointed out, there is more to science than reasoning, or matching. Reasoning, as Miller argues, 'is a processing procedure, not a productive one, and it requires material, something on which to reason'.

Behind Simon's bemusement lies the central distinction: that denying the supremacy or the sufficiency of logic within scientific thought is not in itself tantamount to any concession that scientific knowledge must itself be somehow illogical, or worse, irrational. Rather, it may be the case that knowledge creation – the specifically constructive, generative act of a theory's conception – is, unlike the critical, aspirationally destructive stage of testing it, quite simply an altogether a-logical venture.

This is how Popper saw it. Criticism was, for Popper, a secondary logical endeavour which, when supplied with its complement – blind conjecture – could in principle yield solutions free from derivations, foundations, justifications and all the rest of it.
Provided, of course, that we abandon the fatal notion of an 'ultimate solution', or an 'approximate' or 'probably' definitive solution. These only resurrect the foundations, and are practically unhelpful goals. Asserting the finality of a conjecture guarantees its very stasis and is therefore a self-fulfilling prophecy. Solutions are always open-ended, incomplete and hence as well defined by the problems they usher in as they are by those they eliminate.

Granted, this all seems rather abstrusely removed from the original topic. What relevance does this detour into knowledge-creation have to bear in an argument about morality and logic? The simple fact remains that a claim about how things are isn't commutable with a claim about how they should be. Are we to accept that there are 'true' ways of living, in the same way that there are true theories of physics? All in good time. The point of our detour was simply to gesture at the poverty of reasoning from 'gappism' to relativisim, instrumentalism, or any other variety of subjectivism on offer. The argument to be elaborated, then, is that the is-ought gap is, for all intents and purposes, identical to the logical gaps we are quite accustomed to ignoring in our scientific investigations. Much as some may like to gloss over the inconvenient fact that scientific claims can't be logically derived, justified, secured, or grounded anymore than can their moral counterparts, the gaps don't care. They're there, and there to stay, it seems. This has unfortunate consequences for anyone wishing to reconcile scientific realism with moral anti-realism. Those within this camp ought to be distressed by the existence of what I'm going to call the (albeit less catchy) "don't-can't" gap.

This unholy thing, the don't-can't gap, is a logical barricade. Put simply, when someone misidentifies a contingent tendency (any observable trend or pattern in the world) for a necessarily prohibitive law of nature, they are deriving a cannot from a does not. The move is pervasive within psychology, for example. It occurs whenever a researcher observing the mean participant's score on a battery of validated measures infers that say, humans cannot, due to whatever confluence of environmental and inborn factors, tie their own shoelaces, perform logical puzzles, or hold more than 5 ± 2 items in working memory. The move from the mere tendency (that people don't tie their shoes very well) to the fundamental limitation (i.e., that they can't do it) is, logically speaking, completely invalid.

A good psychologist may go very far in this vein. She may offer what appear to be explanations for the observed impairment, pointing out that people possess a severe bias against tying shoelaces; or better still, that there exists an evolutionarily conserved module in the brain which has left us ill-equipped to handle the modern technological demands of tying shoelaces at the rate necessitated by today's increasingly laced society. Self-help shelves will, all things going well, meet the societal demand by stocking books about how to raise teenagers in a laceless world. They may offer various rules and principles regarding what to do when your teen asks for their first pair of sneakers. Others will satisfy themselves with relaying the interesting fact that gut health promotes rudimentary knot-tying abilities in certain subcultures. The more balanced commentators will offer reassurance: yes, while evidently inferior, when worn during public rituals, out in nature or during periods of trauma, velcro can nonetheless act as a highly adaptive socio-emotional adhesive.
Parody aside, the don't-can't gap is logically airtight; it is never logically permissible to attempt to derive a 'cannot' from a 'does not'. And just like the is/ought gap, we really ought to consider this an entirely irrelevant point of confusion on the part of its source. It has zero relevance to our theorising, precisely because theorising is (again, unlike the critical tonic) not a matter of 'deriving' anything from anything. It would be an incredibly dull state of affairs were this the case.

Fortunately it isn't how things are. In science, we make conjectures, then we criticise them. The good ones stick around – until they don't. At this point we rejoice in their magical failure, and then continue - raising and sacrificing one theory after another. It really isn't too far off to frame it as magic, followed by logic, on a never-ending loop. If clean derivations were the aim, we would, quite literally, have made zero progress. The simple fact that faster than light travel has tended not to happen, or for the more pedantic among us – has never happened – is, for instance, not a logical case for its impossibility. Yet we know that travelling faster than the speed of light is impossible, and neither you nor I would ever wish to say that this knowledge militates against the objectivity of science. Not even a little bit. Instead of wasting thoughts on these endeavours, we can and must throw out 'derivability' as a desirable criterion. And not because, as thinkers like Sam Harris have argued, science is the primary, or the only game in town, but because conjecture and criticism is.

All of which is simply to say – if the is-ought gap somehow bars the possibility of an objective moral theory, then so too the possibility of an objective scientific theory is barred by the don't-can't gap. Along with the is-must gap, for good measure. This should hardly be surprising, given that these so-called 'violations' are merely cases mirroring what is considered by some as the problem of induction. I say 'considered by some' because there is, strictly speaking, no problem of induction – only the faint appearance of one.
But one might quibble that there appears to be something fishy going on. Aha! The two logical violations aren't equivalent, one might contest. The is-ought gap is a violation which pertains to distinct classes of statements – those about how things descriptively are, and those about some other altogether undefinable class of non-descriptive, otherworldly clauses. The don't-can't gap, on the other hand, is a logical violation involving statements of the same species: namely, about the world which exists before our eyes.

Unfortunately, this will also get you nowhere fast – because it's quite simply false. It's false that a claim about how the world 'can't' (or conversely, 'must') be is somehow more directly 'about' the physcial world than is a claim about how it 'ought' to be. Musts, oughts, shoulds, can'ts; these are all varieties of the unobservable. You don't observe a scientific law anymore than you observe beauty, logic, or morality. Again, if this abhors you, you are welcome to dislodge baby with bathwater. But you will be rejecting the objectivity of the speed of light, the conservation of energy, entropy, and so on. If you wish to argue for one kind of objectivity, but not the other, it rests upon you to demonstrate how the two logical violations are different in a way that should matter.
